want to start this video by saying that
I am making it with complete sincerity
this is not a catty dismissive
contemptuous video I am NOT having fun
insulting the famous name of Sam Harris
in this video it's really with kind of
sadness and shock that I discovered what
complete garbage this book is and it's
with no joy in my heart that I'm sitting
here reporting to the Internet
what complete garbage this book is my
expectations coming to this book apart
from the fact that I spent more than 10
years of my life as a scholar of
Buddhism and especially of tera vaada
Buddhism the form of Buddhism that sam
harris is invoking I saw Sam Harris's
work on the internet I saw short
articles he had written most of them
directly or indirectly promoting this
book but articles he wrote expressing
his views about meditation Buddhism
about the possible role of spirituality
under this heading within a Atheist
worldview those short articles are
better than this book having read those
articles and having heard his views I
think in his own his own monologues and
his own interviews this kind of thing I
wasn't expecting this book to be good
but I was expecting it to be better than
what I had already seen on the internet
and it's not this book is terrible
from cover to cover it's complete
garbage
and if you don't know anything about
Buddhism if you're completely ignorant
ISM I'm very sorry that it's gonna
fundamentally mislead you if you do have
a prior background in Buddhism I think
you would just find it impossible to
read I mean when I first heard about
this book I was expecting a certain kind
of academic respond
positive negative evaluative or
otherwise so I actually looked it up in
the academic the library database here
looking for articles responding to it I
would have expected some scholar of
Buddhist philosophy or what-have-you to
have engaged with this book all kinds of
pop psychology books dealing with
Buddhism all kinds of scientistic books
popularizing Buddhism do get some kind
of treatment in that sense even if it's
just a book review
now while this book is famous enough
because the author is a famous guy that
it had reviews in the New York Times and
mainstream newspapers I was stunned by
the complete silence in that sort of
academic press now when this book
arrived on my desk because I had to
order it from another library only when
I picked it up and looked at the text to
understand why it had been ignored and
just looking at it just flipping through
it in the first couple of seconds of
holding the book you can see this is a
book that he's impossible to take
seriously now that does not come as a
surprise because his articles on the
internet were good or wonderful they're
not they're terrible in the wrong way
maybe I'll say a little bit more about
that but if if you want to engage in a
critique of Sam hearses view on Buddhism
meditation etc use the articles the
short articles that post in the Internet
this book is amazingly adapted from a
PhD thesis if you know anything about
academic publishing a certain level of
respect is accorded to almost any book
that is taken from a PhD thesis in this
case a PhD thesis at a major Western
University by a major or famous author
by default it'll be taken pretty
seriously but everything about this book
is impossible to take seriously it's
incredibly poorly written incredibly
poorly sourced it demonstrates just an
embarrassing level of ignorance of
Buddhism and
you know like many true believers
he's self-righteous in his ignorance he
just cites the expertise of his favorite
white guru from California completely
uncritically at one point here he makes
what to me is an embarrassing contrast
between what he values in the terawatt
of Buddhist religion and written canon
she was dismissive and contemptuous
attitude towards Christianity Judaism
and Islam he says here of a particular
Souta
so citta is a short text within the the
Pali Canon this citta is not a
collection of ancient myths
superstitions and taboos it is a
rigorously empirical guide to freeing
the mind from suffering the stuff he
chooses to address within Buddhism
there's a huge literature in English on
sort of every word every key term every
every stage every twist in the road he
chooses to go down and he ignores it
beginning to end he learns nothing from
the work of other scholars from the last
150 years we want to say and again this
is in English Sam Harris can read
English if it was written by someone
whose only language were Lithuanian I
would sympathize and believe me in a
small country like Lao so if you talk
about people whose only language is
lotion you have to sympathize to some
extent their ability to know anything
about Buddhism may be really crippled
because they have so much trouble
accessing modern scholarship and so on
even Chinese I mean it's a few if your
first language is Chinese and you want
to be a scholar of Buddhism now you have
to learn in a European language like
English she's very sad I actually have
written articles about that I've made
other YouTube videos I'm with that but
it reflects how much progress was made
in the last hundred and fifty years in
the study of Buddhism in Europe and
during that same period of hundred and
fifty years basically civil war
revolution and other factors destroyed
what could have been a much more
productive period of scholarship in
China and in other countries
in Asia Sam Harris demonstrates total
incompetence in his use of sources and
that includes purely scientific sources
about the supposed mental effects of
meditation over to religious canonical
sources using the religious literature
of Buddhism to make his point and to
some extent I can only explain that in
terms of stupidity when sam harris is
sitting down and having interview with
joe rogan he may seem intelligent he may
seem exponentially more intelligent than
joe rogan than the person who's
interviewing him but both in the
articles and in the book dealing with
buddhism there's a great deal wrong with
it for which there is no explanation
aside from stupidity but the second
major factor here is ego is the ego trip
this guy is on my friend Joseph
Goldstein one of the finest to be
passing the teachers I know likens this
shift in awareness to the experience of
being fully immersed in a film and then
suddenly realizing that you were sitting
in a theater watching a mere play of
light upon the wall sam harris really
exhibits some of the ego trip of the
true believer in feeling that he has
discovered something wonderful that's
only accessible to a special few and
that he is sharing this with you and in
a sense his appeal to authority is his
own mystical really supernatural
experience now the funny hashtags are
the the funny
caveat to to add there is just that he
insists that this is not supernatural
and that for example what he's attained
through meditation or most of what he's
attained one of the one of the crucial
experiences is actually identical to
certain types of drug
he talks a lot about MDMA about these
mind-altering drugs and how he alleges
the real impact or benefit of tera vaada
buddhist meditation and he smears
together what should be separate
categories of Nibbana and met above and
ah and about sixty I mean
his treatment of the source text in
Buddhism is a hundred percent
incompetent and a hundred percent
self-important he seems to have no
concern there but then claiming that the
the desiderata m-- the objective of this
meditation and Buddhism is the same as
what you experience through the use of
certain mind altering drugs party drugs
like MDMA that cause brain damage
incidentally um anyone sincerely
interested in Buddhism as a religion
should find that deeply disturbing it's
also false and should be refuted as
false I'm not a Buddhist I'm not a
member of the Buddhist religion but yeah
in a sense this is both offensive and
dangerous the other people who I think
should step up the offend it would be
anyone really interested in the
situation for Neuroscience as a
legitimate academic discipline because
what this book contains and shockingly
is adapted from a PhD thesis this shows
neuroscience in modern Western academia
to be no better than a sort of category
of pop psychology with isolated
anecdotes drawn from scientific
experiments and I won't get into detail
about it here but in terms of his
incompetence with sources Sam Harris
does misrepresent scientific studies
that he cites it's much easier to follow
up on that if using his articles in the
Internet where he gives you a link or a
citation and you can then go to the
library and get that source one way or
another and whether it's unintentional
or a product of his own intentional bias
he lies to you about really
serious flaws in the sources he's citing
my earlier video addressed a completely
hilarious study that sam harris treats
as proof positive as definitive proof
that meditation has these effects on the
mind and again he's not even really
saying the same effect he's he's neither
saying the same effects that the study
showed nor is he relating these to the
effects that actual canonical tera vaada
Buddhism would be interested in and then
you look at the study and it's this it's
this fishing expedition that engages in
moving the goalposts these are two
idioms that we use in English and
talking about these problems that have
research but we have no other way to
express it moving the goal posts meaning
you don't really define what it was you
were testing for and then any variation
discovered in the test is treated as a
significant finding because you're
you're moving the goalposts you're
changing the definition of what would be
a significant finding as you go you know
that study he treated as proof positive
it uses these very dubious metrics like
measuring how angry somebody is through
some kind of standardized interview and
then even then this meditation practice
that's allegedly going to make you less
angry which by the way is not the point
of medicine this is not the point of
meditation in tera vaada Buddhism I
managed it I managed to condense that
down to one word there medicine the
useful term meditation ISM that ISM my
not um
hashtag medicine and the actual study
what it shows is their control group sat
and listened to the Lord of the Rings as
a book on tape and the Lord of the Rings
was more effective in reducing anger and
achieving these other desert errata then
the Buddhist meditation now so many
problematic things in that study but it
measured yet it had more than twenty
four measurements so you know you're
allegedly measuring how angry these
people are how stressed out they are how
much of this that the other
psychological character
they have before versus after this
meditation training and for the control
group before versus after listen or the
Rings so they basically got one
measurement that seemed to show a
significant difference in the meditation
group that was not there in the Lord of
the Rings group but just reading the
study as a whole just looking at the
list of the quantitative measurements
and then the conclusions and the
assumptions and just thinking about what
these metrics are what's being measured
and having any basis in Buddhism it
cannot be taken seriously when I was
discussing this with somebody in the
internet they called it a cargo cult
science and I said look I can't get
behind that term because cargo cults get
results cargo cults compared to this
they aren't that bad a cargo cult is a
pretty rational logical religion it's
based on real world experience it gets
results it works its social you know
everyone gets to come out and sing and
dance my expectations were amazingly low
before actually laying hands on this
book but I was assuming that sam harris
was gonna make some kind of significant
contribution from an atheist perspective
from a skeptical perspective to either
the Western understanding of Buddhism or
to a Buddhist reappraisal of neurology
or something and it's not this book is
complete garbage and this book is proof
positive of absolutely nothing aside
from the fact that sam harris is an
idiot